projects/final.md, before:

---
layout: work
type: Project
num: 3
worktitle: Final Project
designdue: Monday, November 22
finaldue: Friday, December 10
---

## Description

Instead of a final exam, you will complete a final project.

Important dates
---------------

-   Project design due: **{{page.designdue}} @ start of class**
-   Presentations: **{{page.finaldue}}, Final Exam Period**
-   Project due: **{{page.finaldue}} @ Final Exam Period**

Guidelines
----------

Unlike the other projects, you may work with one partner for the final
project. You can also work individually if you wish.

You have wide latitude in choosing what to do for your final project.
The only requirements are that it should be **sufficiently complex** and
should **somehow go beyond what we have done in class or lab**.

Your project
idea **must** be approved by your lecture instructor (who is also happy
to help you brainstorm) via email or conversation prior to the design submission.
**Get started early!** Waiting until just before
the deadline to start thinking about your final project will be too
late.

Projects **must** make use of Python `class`es to encapsulate and
structure data.

Design
------

By {{page.designdue}}, you must turn in a design document describing
your project and planning details of how you will implement it.

{% include warning.html content="You should start thinking about, designing, and even
implementing your project before this!" %}

Your design must include:

-   A description the main algorithm which will control the project.
-   A timeline of steps you will take to complete your project with
    deadlines for each step. Plan not just what you must do but the
    ordering of steps that will allow you to complete by the final
    deadline.
-   A description of the way(s) in which your project goes beyond what
    we have done in class and labs.
-   A description of how you envision the project code will be 
    decomposed into classes, methods, and functions. 

You should be as detailed as possible for full credit in your
description. Time spent on the design will pay off immensely as you
implement your project.

Presentation
------------

Everyone will present their projects on {{page.finaldue}}.
Your presentation, using PowerPoint, Google Slides, Prezi, or some
other appropriate presentation medium, will be **at most 6 minutes
long**. (We are serious about this; presentations that are too long will
lose points and/or be rudely cut off. Practice beforehand to make sure
you have a good sense for how much time you have. Six minutes is not
very long at all.)  

Your presentation should include **four slides** and a **quick demo of your project**. 
The slides should answer the following questions, one per
slide:
-   What is the name of your project, and who worked on it? (title slide)
-   What is the overall idea of your project?
-   What is interesting/unique about your project?
-   What was one of the biggest challenges you faced and how did you
    overcome it?

You might plan to spend, for example, 30 seconds on each slide and then
use the remaining time doing the demo.

{% include note.html content=" **Do not show us your code**! This is super boring and wastes a lot of
time. If there is some specific code you want to show us to illustrate
something that is interesting/unique about your project, or about a
challenge you overcame, copy it onto one of your slides." %}

If you worked on the project with a partner, **both partners** must be
involved in giving the presentation. For example, you might have one
partner present the slides and the other present the project demo (but
feel free to do whatever makes sense).

What to turn in
---------------

You should turn in

-   Your presentation slides (if your slides are on Prezi or Google
    Slides or some other cloud-based system, just submit the URL).
-   A document explaining how to run your project and any other special
    notes to the grader.
-   **All** the Python source files, data files, etc. necessary to run
    your project.

## Grading Criteria
* A **Complete** project includes:
  * A design document submitted on-time and meeting the requirements given earlier.
  * A presentation lasting five to six minutes and consisting of four slides, 
    meeting the criteria given above.
  * An implementation in which the following are true:
    * The program is sufficiently complex and goes beyond what we have
	  done in class or lab.
	* Makes appropriate use of classes, methods, and functions 
	  to encapsulate and structure data.
	* No runtime errors, including those resulting from erroneous user input.
	* No syntax errors.
	* Instructor feedback is properly incorporated into the final program.
* A **Partially Complete** project:
  * A design document is submitted.
  * A presentation lasting no more than six minutes and addresses at least
    some of the criteria given above.
  * An implementation in which:
    * The program is sufficiently complex and goes beyond what we have
	  done in class or lab.
	* No syntax errors.

<!-- Of course, the [Python style guide]({{site.baseurl}}/python_style_guide.html) and -->
<!-- [style checker]({{site.baseurl}}/python_style_guide.html) still apply! -->

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Commit message:

Slight edit to Final Project document.

projects/final.md, after:

---
layout: work
type: Project
num: 3
worktitle: Final Project
designdue: Monday, November 22
finaldue: Friday, December 10
---

## Description

Instead of a final exam, you will complete a final project.

Important dates
---------------

-   Project design due: **{{page.designdue}} @ start of class**
-   Presentations: **{{page.finaldue}}, Final Exam Period**
-   Project due: **{{page.finaldue}} @ Final Exam Period**

Guidelines
----------

Unlike the other projects, you may work with one partner for the final
project. You can also work individually if you wish.

You have wide latitude in choosing what to do for your final project.
The only requirements are that it should be **sufficiently complex** and
should **somehow go beyond what we have done in class or lab**.

Your project
idea **must** be approved by your lecture instructor (who is also happy
to help you brainstorm) via email or conversation prior to the design submission.
**Get started early!** Waiting until just before
the deadline to start thinking about your final project will be too
late.

Projects **must** make use of Python `class`es to encapsulate and
structure data.

Design
------

By {{page.designdue}}, you must turn in a design document describing
your project and planning details of how you will implement it.

{% include warning.html content="You should start thinking about, designing, and even
implementing your project before this!" %}

Your design document must include:

-   Your name, and also the name of your collaborator if it is a team project.
-   A description the main algorithm which will control the project.
-   A timeline of steps you will take to complete your project with
    deadlines for each step. Plan not just what you must do but the
    ordering of steps that will allow you to complete by the final
    deadline.
-   A description of the way(s) in which your project goes beyond what
    we have done in class and labs.
-   A description of how you envision the project code will be 
    decomposed into classes, methods, and functions. 

You should be as detailed as possible for full credit in your
description. Time spent on the design will pay off immensely as you
implement your project.

Presentation
------------

Everyone will present their projects on {{page.finaldue}}.
Your presentation, using PowerPoint, Google Slides, Prezi, or some
other appropriate presentation medium, will be **at most 6 minutes
long**. (We are serious about this; presentations that are too long will
lose points and/or be rudely cut off. Practice beforehand to make sure
you have a good sense for how much time you have. Six minutes is not
very long at all.)  

Your presentation should include **four slides** and a **quick demo of your project**. 
The slides should answer the following questions, one per
slide:
-   What is the name of your project, and who worked on it? (title slide)
-   What is the overall idea of your project?
-   What is interesting/unique about your project?
-   What was one of the biggest challenges you faced and how did you
    overcome it?

You might plan to spend, for example, 30 seconds on each slide and then
use the remaining time doing the demo.

{% include note.html content=" **Do not show us your code**! This is super boring and wastes a lot of
time. If there is some specific code you want to show us to illustrate
something that is interesting/unique about your project, or about a
challenge you overcame, copy it onto one of your slides." %}

If you worked on the project with a partner, **both partners** must be
involved in giving the presentation. For example, you might have one
partner present the slides and the other present the project demo (but
feel free to do whatever makes sense).

What to turn in
---------------

You should turn in

-   Your presentation slides (if your slides are on Prezi or Google
    Slides or some other cloud-based system, just submit the URL).
-   A document explaining how to run your project and any other special
    notes to the grader.
-   **All** the Python source files, data files, etc. necessary to run
    your project.

## Grading Criteria
* A **Complete** project includes:
  * A design document submitted on-time and meeting the requirements given earlier.
  * A presentation lasting five to six minutes and consisting of four slides, 
    meeting the criteria given above.
  * An implementation in which the following are true:
    * The program is sufficiently complex and goes beyond what we have
	  done in class or lab.
	* Makes appropriate use of classes, methods, and functions 
	  to encapsulate and structure data.
	* No runtime errors, including those resulting from erroneous user input.
	* No syntax errors.
	* Instructor feedback is properly incorporated into the final program.
* A **Partially Complete** project:
  * A design document is submitted.
  * A presentation lasting no more than six minutes and addresses at least
    some of the criteria given above.
  * An implementation in which:
    * The program is sufficiently complex and goes beyond what we have
	  done in class or lab.
	* No syntax errors.

<!-- Of course, the [Python style guide]({{site.baseurl}}/python_style_guide.html) and -->
<!-- [style checker]({{site.baseurl}}/python_style_guide.html) still apply! -->

------------------------------------------------------------------------
