labs/doublets.md, before:

---
layout: work
type: Lab
num: 5
worktitle: Mutation is the Word
---

## Overview

In this lab we will make extensive use of while loops and strings.  We will explore
mutation of strings (words, DNA, ...) through playing the game Doublets.

## Materials
* <a href="../data/english3.txt" download>Common English Words</a>
* <a href="../code/dictionary.py" download>`dictionary.py`</a> Python Module
* Lab Partner

## Description

[Charles Lutwidge Dodgson](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lewis_Carroll) (aka
Lewis Carroll), who is most famous for his novel "Alice in Wonderland",
introduced a puzzle called Doublets in an article for
*Vanity Fair*.  His rules description is as follows:

>The rules of the Puzzle are simple enough. Two words are proposed, of the same length;
and the Puzzle consists in linking these together by interposing other words,
each of which shall differ from the next word in one letter only. That is to say,
one letter may be changed in one of the given words, then one letter in the word so
obtained, and so on, till we arrive at the other given word. The letters must not be
interchanged among themselves, but each must keep to its own place. As an example,
the word 'head' may be changed into 'tail' by interposing the words
'heal, teal, tell, tall'. I call the given words 'a Doublet', the interposed words
'Links', and the entire series 'a Chain', of which I here append an example:

    H E A D
    h e a l
    t e a l
    t e l l
    t a l l
    T A I L

>It is, perhaps, needless to state that it is de rigueur that the links should be
English words, such as might be used in good society.

(More details on the connection between Lewis Carroll and genetics can be found in an article by
David B. Searls entitled
[From *Jabberwocky* to Genome: Lewis Carroll and Computational Biology](http://www.liebertonline.com/doi/abs/10.1089/10665270152530881).

Our task for this lab is to create a Python program that lets a user play the Doublets game
and enforces all the rules given above by Lewis Carroll.

## Grading Criteria

* A **Complete** submission includes:
  * An Evaluation Document containing:
    * Pseudocode from Step 1
	* Thoughtful answers to questions from Step 4
  * `doublets.py`
    * Correctly implements all features from Step 2 and Step 3
  * No Pycharm style warnings.
* A **Partially Complete** submission includes:
  * An Evaluation Document containing:
    * Pseudocode from Step 1
  * `doublets.py`
    * Correctly implements all features from Step 2
	* Includes serious attempts at completing at least three of the requirements for Step 3.

### Step 1 - Develop Pseudocode

Develop an algorithmic solution using
*pseudocode*.  This should correspond to the structure of a
Python program, but is written in English instead of Python.

For example, pseudocode for a guessing-game could look like this:

    Generate a number for the human to guess
    While the human has not guessed the number:
        Request a guess from the human
        If it's too high or too low, say so
    Congratulate the human on their insight

The point is that this is *structured* like Python, using indentation
and hinting at loops and conditionals.  But the individual pieces are
just English descriptions, which you will later translate into precise
Python code.  You do **not** need to use any functions at this
point---we will do that later.

To demonstrate the eventual behavior of the program, here is a
sample run of the Doublets game. For now, do not worry about what
should happen if the user enters invalid input; assume that the user
will always enter exactly what is expected.

    What is the starting word? CAT
    What is the ending word? DOG
    Start   = CAT
    Current = CAT
    End     = DOG
    Which character do you want to change? (the first character is 1) 3
    What is your new character? B
    Current = CAB
    End     = DOG
    Which character do you want to change? (the first character is 1) 2
    What is your new character? O
    Current = COB
    End     = DOG
    Which character do you want to change? (the first character is 1) 3
    What is your new character? G
    Current = COG
    End     = DOG
    Which character do you want to change? (the first character is 1) 1
    What is your new character? D
    Solution path found in 4 steps.
    CAT -> CAB -> COB -> COG -> DOG
	
Create a text file which will serve as your Evaluation Document.
Include your pseudocode in this file.
	
### Step 2 - Initial Implementation 

#### Step 2.1 - `swap_character()` 

Create a new Python file named `doublets.py`. Begin by writing the `swap_character()` 
function:

	def swap_character(word: str, where: int, updated: str) -> str:

Given a word, the index of a character in the word to replace, and a new character to 
insert, this function will return a new string with the new character in place of the old
character. In keeping with our example transcript above, the `where` variable will be an
integer between 1 and the length of `word`. 

To implement `swap_character()`, you will need to use string slicing and string 
concatenation.

Here are a few examples you can use to test your implementation of `swap_character()`:
* `swap_character("cat", 3, "r")` should return `"car"`
* `swap_character("track", 3, "u")` should return `"truck"`
* `swap_character("talk", 1, "w")` should return `"walk"`

#### Step 2.2 - Main program

Based on your pseduocode description, implement your program in Python, within 
a function named `main()`. When you have received the user's input concerning the
character position to change and new character to use, call `swap_character()` to
build the updated word. Include the printing of the number of solution steps, but
do not include the solution chain until Step 2.3. 

The program structure should look something like this:

    def main():
      ...
	  
	  
	def swap_character(word: str, where: int, updated: str) -> str:
	  ...


    main()
	
Be sure you can successfully play a game of Doublets with your
program, as shown in the example above, before moving on to the next step.

#### Step 2.3 - Solution Path

Create a string variable to store the solution chain. It should initially be the starting
word. On each loop step, concatenate `" -> "` and the current word. Then print it out 
at the end of the program.


### Step 3 - Error Handling and Function Decomposition

Of course the user might not always enter input in the expected form.
In this step, you will incrementally modify your program to ensure that 
the user only enters valid input. Building a program with robust error
handling is much easier if it is decomposed into functions, so we will
introduce error handling and functions into our program together.

#### Step 3.1 - Starting word validation
Write a function called `get_start_word()` to get the starting word from the user.
First, create the function header:

	def get_start_word() -> str:
	
	
In Step 2.2, you wrote an `input` instruction to request the starting word. Copy it into 
`get_start_word()`. On the next line, add a `return` statement to send the value 
back to the function caller. Then replace the original input statement with a call 
to `get_start_word()`. 

This sets up the structure for validating our input. By handling the input validation
in a function, we keep the `main()` code straightforward and uncluttered.

For English word validation, download the text file 
<a href="../data/english3.txt" download>`english3.txt`</a>
and the Python module 
<a href="../code/dictionary.py" download>`dictionary.py`</a> files, and
make sure they are in the same folder where you will put your lab. At the top of your
Python program, you should put

    import dictionary

which will allow you to use the functions in `dictionary.py`.

The dictionary module contains a function
`valid_word(word, file)`, which will
return `True` if the word is found in the file and `False`
otherwise.  You can call the function by writing something like

    dictionary.valid_word(some_word, 'english3.txt')
	
Handling erroneous input requires using a loop. The following example shows
a loop structure that you may find useful in completing `get_start_word()`:

	valid = False
	while not valid:
		word = input("Enter a word that is at least four letters long: ")
		if len(word) < 4:
			print(f"{word} is less than four letters long. Please try again.")
		else:
			valid = True
			
Here is an example of how the program would behave with the error checking in place:

    What is the starting word? lig
	lig is not a word. Please try again.
	What is the starting word? log
    What is the ending word?

#### Step 3.2 - Ending word validation 
Write a function to validate the ending word. This will be a slightly more complex 
variation of the function you wrote in Step 3.1, as it must ensure not only that 
the word is valid, it must also ensure that the word is of the same length as the
starting word. Here is the function definition header:

	def get_end_word(start_word_length: int) -> str:

Replace your original `input` statement with a call to `get_end_word()` to ensure 
that the ending word is valid and of the correct length. Here is a continuation of 
our earlier example to show how the program should behave:

	What is the starting word? log
    What is the ending word? worm
    The lengths are not equal. Please try again.
    What is the ending word? sku
    sku is not a word. Please try again.
    What is the ending word? bug
    Start   = LOG
    Current = LOG
    End     = BUG
    Which character do you want to change? (the first character is 1)
	
#### Step 3.3 - Character index validation
Write a function to validate the user's input of a character index to change. 
It should return an integer between 1 and the length of the current word. Any 
non-integer or any integer outside that range should result in a message to 
the user requesting suitable input. Here is the function declaration header:

	def get_index(current_word_len: int) -> int:

Replace your original `input` statement with a call to `get_index()` to ensure valid
input. Here is a continuation of our earlier example to show how the program should 
behave:
	
	Start   = LOG
    Current = LOG
    End     = BUG
    Which character do you want to change? (the first character is 1) 0
    0 is out of range. Please try again.
    Which character do you want to change? (the first character is 1) 4
    4 is out of range. Please try again.
    Which character do you want to change? (the first character is 1) x
    x is not a number. Please try again.
    Which character do you want to change? (the first character is 1) 1
    What is your new character?
	
#### Step 3.4 - Character validation 
Write a function to ensure that the user inputs a single character. Here is
the function declaration header:

	def get_one_character() -> str:

Replace your original `input` statement with a call to `get_one_character()`.
Here is a continuation of our earlier example to show how the program should
behave once you are using your function:

    Which character do you want to change? (the first character is 1) 1
    What is your new character? bb
	bb is more than one character. Please try again.
    What is your new character? b
	Current = BOG
    End     = BUG
    Which character do you want to change? (the first character is 1)
	
#### Step 3.5 - Word validation 
Unlike the other error-handling steps, this step is straightforward to
implement without writing an additional function. Before committing
to the new word with the new character, make sure the new word obtained from calling
`swap_character()` is a valid word, again using the `dictionary` module. If it is a 
valid word, update your current word, the number of steps, and the solution path.
If not, print an error message. In either case, the program will resume
at the top of the `while` loop.

Here is a continuation of our earlier example with this error-checking
in place:

	Current = BOG
    End     = BUG
    Which character do you want to change? (the first character is 1) 2
	What is your new character? 4
	B4G is not a valid word
	Current = BOG
	End     = BUG
	What character do you want to change? (the first character is 1) 2
	What is your new character? u
	solution path found in 2 steps.
	LOG -> BOG -> BUG

### Step 4 - Play

Once your program is working, try out some of the transformations below:

* FIRE -- HEAT
* SLEEP -- DREAM
* APE -- MAN
* WHITE -- BLACK

What is the minimum number of steps you can achieve for each?

### Future Thoughts

Your `doublets.py` program lets the user chose what character to change at each step,
and then verifies that each new word is a valid word.  Can you think of a way to always find the
minimum number of steps to transform one word to another?  How will you know if a path
between two words can be found? Include your answers to these questions
in the `Evaluation Document`.

## What to Hand In

Make sure you examine all of the style suggestions that PyCharm makes, and adjust your code accordingly.

You must hand in:

* Evaluation Document (containing pseudocode, and answers to
	"Future thoughts" questions)
* `doublets.py`
* `dictionary.py`
* `english3.txt`

(Yes, please turn in `dictionary.py`
and `english3.txt` even though you did not create them---it makes
the grading process much easier!)

Commit message:

Edited Doublets lab to encourage use of the Python Console.

labs/doublets.md, after:

---
layout: work
type: Lab
num: 5
worktitle: Mutation is the Word
---

## Overview

In this lab we will make extensive use of while loops and strings.  We will explore
mutation of strings (words, DNA, ...) through playing the game Doublets.

## Materials
* <a href="../data/english3.txt" download>Common English Words</a>
* <a href="../code/dictionary.py" download>`dictionary.py`</a> Python Module
* Lab Partner

## Description

[Charles Lutwidge Dodgson](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lewis_Carroll) (aka
Lewis Carroll), who is most famous for his novel "Alice in Wonderland",
introduced a puzzle called Doublets in an article for
*Vanity Fair*.  His rules description is as follows:

>The rules of the Puzzle are simple enough. Two words are proposed, of the same length;
and the Puzzle consists in linking these together by interposing other words,
each of which shall differ from the next word in one letter only. That is to say,
one letter may be changed in one of the given words, then one letter in the word so
obtained, and so on, till we arrive at the other given word. The letters must not be
interchanged among themselves, but each must keep to its own place. As an example,
the word 'head' may be changed into 'tail' by interposing the words
'heal, teal, tell, tall'. I call the given words 'a Doublet', the interposed words
'Links', and the entire series 'a Chain', of which I here append an example:

    H E A D
    h e a l
    t e a l
    t e l l
    t a l l
    T A I L

>It is, perhaps, needless to state that it is de rigueur that the links should be
English words, such as might be used in good society.

(More details on the connection between Lewis Carroll and genetics can be found in an article by
David B. Searls entitled
[From *Jabberwocky* to Genome: Lewis Carroll and Computational Biology](http://www.liebertonline.com/doi/abs/10.1089/10665270152530881).

Our task for this lab is to create a Python program that lets a user play the Doublets game
and enforces all the rules given above by Lewis Carroll.

## Grading Criteria

* A **Complete** submission includes:
  * An Evaluation Document containing:
    * Pseudocode from Step 1
	* Thoughtful answers to questions from Step 4
  * `doublets.py`
    * Correctly implements all features from Step 2 and Step 3
  * No Pycharm style warnings.
* A **Partially Complete** submission includes:
  * An Evaluation Document containing:
    * Pseudocode from Step 1
  * `doublets.py`
    * Correctly implements all features from Step 2
	* Includes serious attempts at completing at least three of the requirements for Step 3.

### Step 1 - Develop Pseudocode

Develop an algorithmic solution using
*pseudocode*.  This should correspond to the structure of a
Python program, but is written in English instead of Python.

For example, pseudocode for a guessing-game could look like this:

    Generate a number for the human to guess
    While the human has not guessed the number:
        Request a guess from the human
        If it's too high or too low, say so
    Congratulate the human on their insight

The point is that this is *structured* like Python, using indentation
and hinting at loops and conditionals.  But the individual pieces are
just English descriptions, which you will later translate into precise
Python code.  You do **not** need to use any functions at this
point---we will do that later.

To demonstrate the eventual behavior of the program, here is a
sample run of the Doublets game. For now, do not worry about what
should happen if the user enters invalid input; assume that the user
will always enter exactly what is expected.

    What is the starting word? CAT
    What is the ending word? DOG
    Start   = CAT
    Current = CAT
    End     = DOG
    Which character do you want to change? (the first character is 1) 3
    What is your new character? B
    Current = CAB
    End     = DOG
    Which character do you want to change? (the first character is 1) 2
    What is your new character? O
    Current = COB
    End     = DOG
    Which character do you want to change? (the first character is 1) 3
    What is your new character? G
    Current = COG
    End     = DOG
    Which character do you want to change? (the first character is 1) 1
    What is your new character? D
    Solution path found in 4 steps.
    CAT -> CAB -> COB -> COG -> DOG
	
Create a text file which will serve as your Evaluation Document.
Include your pseudocode in this file.
	
### Step 2 - Initial Implementation 

#### Step 2.1 - `swap_character()` 

Create a new Python file named `doublets.py`. Begin by writing the `swap_character()` 
function:

	def swap_character(word: str, where: int, updated: str) -> str:

Given a word, the index of a character in the word to replace, and a new character to 
insert, this function will return a new string with the new character in place of the old
character. In keeping with our example transcript above, the `where` variable will be an
integer between 1 and the length of `word`. 

To implement `swap_character()`, you will need to use string slicing and string 
concatenation.

Here are a few examples. Test your implementation of `swap_character()` in the Python Console
at the bottom of the PyCharm window with these examples:
* `swap_character("cat", 3, "r")` should return `"car"`
* `swap_character("track", 3, "u")` should return `"truck"`
* `swap_character("talk", 1, "w")` should return `"walk"`

#### Step 2.2 - Main program

Based on your pseduocode description, implement your program in Python, within 
a function named `main()`. When you have received the user's input concerning the
character position to change and new character to use, call `swap_character()` to
build the updated word. Include the printing of the number of solution steps, but
do not include the solution chain until Step 2.3. 

The program structure should look something like this:

    def main():
      ...
	  
	  
	def swap_character(word: str, where: int, updated: str) -> str:
	  ...


    main()
	
Be sure you can successfully play a game of Doublets with your
program, as shown in the example above, before moving on to the next step.

#### Step 2.3 - Solution Path

Create a string variable to store the solution chain. It should initially be the starting
word. On each loop step, concatenate `" -> "` and the current word. Then print it out 
at the end of the program.


### Step 3 - Error Handling and Function Decomposition

Of course the user might not always enter input in the expected form.
In this step, you will incrementally modify your program to ensure that 
the user only enters valid input. Building a program with robust error
handling is much easier if it is decomposed into functions, so we will
introduce error handling and functions into our program together.

#### Step 3.1 - Starting word validation
Write a function called `get_start_word()` to get the starting word from the user.
First, create the function header:

	def get_start_word() -> str:
	
	
In Step 2.2, you wrote an `input` instruction to request the starting word. Copy it into 
`get_start_word()`. On the next line, add a `return` statement to send the value 
back to the function caller. Then replace the original input statement with a call 
to `get_start_word()`. 

This sets up the structure for validating our input. By handling the input validation
in a function, we keep the `main()` code straightforward and uncluttered.

For English word validation, download the text file 
<a href="../data/english3.txt" download>`english3.txt`</a>
and the Python module 
<a href="../code/dictionary.py" download>`dictionary.py`</a> files, and
make sure they are in the same folder where you will put your lab. At the top of your
Python program, you should put

    import dictionary

which will allow you to use the functions in `dictionary.py`.

The dictionary module contains a function
`valid_word(word, file)`, which will
return `True` if the word is found in the file and `False`
otherwise.  You can call the function by writing something like

    dictionary.valid_word(some_word, 'english3.txt')
	
Handling erroneous input requires using a loop. The following example shows
a loop structure that you may find useful in completing `get_start_word()`:

	valid = False
	while not valid:
		word = input("Enter a word that is at least four letters long: ")
		if len(word) < 4:
			print(f"{word} is less than four letters long. Please try again.")
		else:
			valid = True
			
Test your program in the Python Console before incorporating it into the rest of the program.
When you test it in the console, give it a few invalid words followed by a valid word to ensure
it behaves correctly.
			
Here is an example of how the program would behave with the error checking in place:

    What is the starting word? lig
	lig is not a word. Please try again.
	What is the starting word? log
    What is the ending word?

#### Step 3.2 - Ending word validation 
Write a function to validate the ending word. This will be a slightly more complex 
variation of the function you wrote in Step 3.1, as it must ensure not only that 
the word is valid, it must also ensure that the word is of the same length as the
starting word. Here is the function definition header:

	def get_end_word(start_word_length: int) -> str:

Replace your original `input` statement with a call to `get_end_word()` to ensure 
that the ending word is valid and of the correct length. Test the function in the
Python Console first. Make sure it only allows words of the specified word length.
For example, if you test it as `get_end_word(5)`, it should only allow you to enter
words of length 5.

Here is a continuation of our earlier example to show how the program as a whole 
should behave once you have incorporated `get_end_word()`:

	What is the starting word? log
    What is the ending word? worm
    The lengths are not equal. Please try again.
    What is the ending word? sku
    sku is not a word. Please try again.
    What is the ending word? bug
    Start   = LOG
    Current = LOG
    End     = BUG
    Which character do you want to change? (the first character is 1)
	
#### Step 3.3 - Character index validation
Write a function to validate the user's input of a character index to change. 
It should return an integer between 1 and the length of the current word. Any 
non-integer or any integer outside that range should result in a message to 
the user requesting suitable input. Here is the function declaration header:

	def get_index(current_word_len: int) -> int:

Replace your original `input` statement with a call to `get_index()` to ensure valid
input. Try `get_index(5)` in the Python Console. It should only allow you to enter numbers 
from 1 to 5.

Here is a continuation of our earlier example to show how the program should behave:
	
	Start   = LOG
    Current = LOG
    End     = BUG
    Which character do you want to change? (the first character is 1) 0
    0 is out of range. Please try again.
    Which character do you want to change? (the first character is 1) 4
    4 is out of range. Please try again.
    Which character do you want to change? (the first character is 1) x
    x is not a number. Please try again.
    Which character do you want to change? (the first character is 1) 1
    What is your new character?
	
#### Step 3.4 - Character validation 
Write a function to ensure that the user inputs a single character. Here is
the function declaration header:

	def get_one_character() -> str:

Replace your original `input` statement with a call to `get_one_character()`.
Test it in the Python Console. Make sure it only allows single-character answers.
Try testing it by typing the Enter key without any input: it should ask the user
to try again in that case as well.

Here is a continuation of our earlier example to show how the program should
behave once you are using your function:

    Which character do you want to change? (the first character is 1) 1
    What is your new character? bb
	bb is more than one character. Please try again.
    What is your new character? b
	Current = BOG
    End     = BUG
    Which character do you want to change? (the first character is 1)
	
#### Step 3.5 - Word validation 
Unlike the other error-handling steps, this step is straightforward to
implement without writing an additional function. Before committing
to the new word with the new character, make sure the new word obtained from calling
`swap_character()` is a valid word, again using the `dictionary` module. If it is a 
valid word, update your current word, the number of steps, and the solution path.
If not, print an error message. In either case, the program will resume
at the top of the `while` loop.

Here is a continuation of our earlier example with this error-checking
in place:

	Current = BOG
    End     = BUG
    Which character do you want to change? (the first character is 1) 2
	What is your new character? 4
	B4G is not a valid word
	Current = BOG
	End     = BUG
	What character do you want to change? (the first character is 1) 2
	What is your new character? u
	solution path found in 2 steps.
	LOG -> BOG -> BUG

### Step 4 - Play

Once your program is working, try out some of the transformations below:

* FIRE -- HEAT
* SLEEP -- DREAM
* APE -- MAN
* WHITE -- BLACK

What is the minimum number of steps you can achieve for each?

### Future Thoughts

Your `doublets.py` program lets the user chose what character to change at each step,
and then verifies that each new word is a valid word.  Can you think of a way to always find the
minimum number of steps to transform one word to another?  How will you know if a path
between two words can be found? Include your answers to these questions
in the `Evaluation Document`.

## What to Hand In

Make sure you examine all of the style suggestions that PyCharm makes, and adjust your code accordingly.

You must hand in:

* Evaluation Document (containing pseudocode, and answers to
	"Future thoughts" questions)
* `doublets.py`
* `dictionary.py`
* `english3.txt`

(Yes, please turn in `dictionary.py`
and `english3.txt` even though you did not create them---it makes
the grading process much easier!)
