labs/pygame.md, before:

---
layout: work
type: Lab
num: 11
worktitle: Graphics and Animation
---

## Materials

* [Pygame](https://www.pygame.org/)

## Overview

For today's lab,
[download the latest version of Pygame](https://www.pygame.org/wiki/GettingStarted)
for your operating system. To download and install it on your computer, open the Terminal tab at the bottom of your 
PyCharm window, then enter the following instruction (on a Mac, use `python3` instead of `python`):

    python -m pip install -U pygame
    
It should respond with a message like the following:

    Collecting pygame
      Downloading pygame-2.0.0-cp38-cp38-win32.whl (4.8 MB)
         |████████████████████████████████| 4.8 MB 3.3 MB/s
    Installing collected packages: pygame
    Successfully installed pygame-2.0.0

To make sure it works, try out one of the examples:

    python -m pygame.examples.aliens
    
    
## Step 1: Faces (5 points)

### Step 1.1: The Game Loop

Every `pygame` program has at its heart a `while` loop that updates the screen and checks to see what
actions the user has taken. Prior to that loop, we write code to set up `pygame` and open a window in
which our scene will be rendered. The code below will start pygame, set up an empty window, and end the 
program when the user closes the window.

Create a file called `face1.py` and enter the code below:


    import pygame
    from pygame.locals import *


    def main():
        pygame.init()
        surface = pygame.display.set_mode((640, 400))
        running = True
        while running:
            pygame.display.update()
            for event in pygame.event.get():
                if event.type == QUIT:
                    running = False
        pygame.quit()

    if __name__ == '__main__':
        main()
        

### Step 1.2: Drawing shapes

The program below is a modification of the game loop from Step 1.1. Replace the code from Step 1.1
in `face1.py` with the code below:

    import pygame
    from pygame.locals import *


    def draw_all(surface):
        surface.fill(pygame.Color(255, 255, 255))
        pygame.draw.circle(surface, pygame.Color(255, 0, 0), (10, 10), 10)
        pygame.draw.rect(surface, pygame.Color(0, 255, 0), (10, 10, 20, 20))
        pygame.draw.line(surface, pygame.Color(0, 0, 0), (10, 10), (20, 20))
        pygame.draw.circle(surface, pygame.Color(0, 0, 0), (30, 30), 10, width=1)
        pygame.draw.rect(surface, pygame.Color(0, 0, 0), (40, 40, 20, 20), width=1)
        pygame.display.update()


    def main():
        pygame.init()
        surface = pygame.display.set_mode((640, 480))
        running = True
        while running:
            draw_all(surface)
            for event in pygame.event.get():
                if event.type == QUIT:
                    running = False
        pygame.quit()


    if __name__ == '__main__':
        main()

In this program, we have instructed `pygame` to draw several different shapes on the screen.
When we draw on the screen, we first need to
be familiar with the coordinate system. We denote the width as x and
the height as y.  Most computer graphics modules, including `pygame`,
specify that the x, y origin (0,0) is located in the upper-left corner
of the screen, with x increasing to the right and y increasing
downwards.

The first instruction (`surface.fill`) sets the background color of the window. Each `pygame.Color`
object is defined by three parameters, ranging in value from 0 to 255: its red, green, and blue levels.

You can also refer to colors by name, using a string. Feel free to consult this 
[list of available colors]({{site.baseurl}}/labs/pygame_colors.html) when drawing 
your `pygame` objects. Using a color string, the fill instruction would look like this:

    surface.fill('white')

The next two instructions (drawing a circle and a rectangle) give us filled-in shapes. Each instruction 
specifies the surface on which it is to be drawn and its color. To draw a circle, we also specify its 
center and its radius. To draw a rectangle, we specify the (x, y) coordinates of its upper-left corner, 
followed by its width and height.

The next three instructions (drawing a line, a circle, and a rectangle) give us lines and outlines. To
draw a line, we specify its surface, its color, the (x, y) coordinates where the line starts, and the 
(x, y) coordinates where the line ends. Drawing outlines of circles and rectangles requires giving it
a `width` parameter, denoting the thickness of the outline.

Also, notice that the first thing to be drawn is covered by the images
that follow. This indicates that the way that images are drawn,
their [Z-order](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Z-order), is based on time.

### Step 1.3: Drawing Faces

Modify the `draw_all` function from the previous step to draw a face 
on the screen. At a minimum, the face should have eyes, ears, a mouth 
and a nose. You can find more shapes on the 
[Pygame Documentation](https://www.pygame.org/docs/ref/draw.html) page.

Here is a version of `draw_all` that represents the very start of a face. 
This is intended as inspiration to get you started; please feel free to 
ignore, modify, or replace any and all aspects of this example.

    def draw_all(surface):
        surface.fill('white')
        pygame.draw.circle(surface, 'red', (320, 240), 50)
        pygame.draw.circle(surface, 'yellow', (295, 215), 18)
        pygame.draw.circle(surface, 'yellow', (345, 215), 18)
        pygame.draw.line(surface, 'orange', (300, 270), (340, 270))
        pygame.display.update()

## Step 2: Classes (5 points total)

### Step 2.1: Using the Mouse

Create a file called `points.py` and enter the code below:

    import pygame
    from pygame.locals import *


    def draw_all(surface, shapes):
        surface.fill('black')
        for shape in shapes:
            pygame.draw.circle(surface, 'white', shape, 5)
        pygame.display.update()


    def main():
        pygame.init()
        surface = pygame.display.set_mode((640, 480))
        shapes = []
        running = True
        while running:
            draw_all(surface, shapes)
            for event in pygame.event.get():
                if event.type == QUIT:
                    running = False
                elif event.type == MOUSEBUTTONDOWN:
                    shapes.append((event.pos[0], event.pos[1]))
        pygame.quit()


    if __name__ == '__main__':
        main()

        
Run the program. Click the mouse at various locations on the window.

The following elements are distinctive in this program:
* It checks for the `MOUSEBUTTONDOWN` event type.
* When it sees that event, it adds an `(x,y)` coordinate to the `points` list.
* It draws a white circle at each `(x,y)` coordinate indicated by a mouse click.


### Step 2.2: A Population of Faces (4 points)

We will represent a `Face` with a class in Python. The `Face` will need to remember
the `(x,y)` coordinates for the center of the face. The `draw` method of the `Face` class 
abstracts the original face from Step 1.3 so it can be centered around any `(x,y)` coordinates. 
This will let us move the face around the screen. To make this work, the circle representing the 
head will be located at `self.x`, `self.y`, and the other components will be represented as 
offsets from there. Of course, you should use your own face-drawing code in place of the 
example code shown below.

    class Face:
        def __init__(self, x, y):
            self.x = x
            self.y = y

        def draw(self, surface):
            pygame.draw.circle(surface, 'red', (self.x, self.y), 100)
            pygame.draw.circle(surface, 'yellow', (self.x - 25, self.y - 25), 35)
            pygame.draw.circle(surface, 'yellow', (self.x + 25, self.y - 25), 35)
            pygame.draw.line(surface, 'orange', (self.x - 20, self.y + 30), (self.x + 20, self.y + 30))
    
Create a new Python file called `face2.py` and enter your version of the Face class. 

Copy the code from Step 2.1 into `face2.py`. That code appends an `(x,y)` coordinate to the 
`shapes` list. Instead of appending that coordinate, append a `Face` object instead.
Where that code appends a point to the `shapes` Also alter `draw_all` to ask each `shape` 
to draw itself instead of drawing a circle around an `(x,y)` coordinate. Test it out, and 
make sure it places a `Face` wherever you click.

### Step 2.3: Random Colors (1 point)

Modify your `Face` class so that it has a `self.color` attribute. It should be initialized by
a `color` parameter that you add to the `Face` class's constructor (`__init__`). 
In the `draw` method of your `Face` class, replace references to the base color used for 
the face with `self.color`. (In the example of Step 1.3, the base color to be replaced was red.) 

Once these changes to the `Face` class are complete, modify `main` so
that each `Face` placed is given a random color. To assign a random
`Color`, create a list of colors you would like to employ. Then use `random.choice()` to 
select a color from that list every time a new `Face` object is created.


## Step 3: Movement (4 points total)

### Step 3.1: Animation

With the faces being drawn by an object, we
can now make these objects move. Add new attributes to
your `Face`, called `velocity_x` and `velocity_y`, to capture
the velocity of the `Face`. For now, initialize them to 1, so they will
be moving at a speed of 1 pixel per update, as shown here:

        self.velocity_x = 1
        self.velocity_y = 1

Next, add a new method to your `Face` class
called `update`. When called, this function will change the
values of `self.x` and `self.y` by the velocity, and
thus simulate movement.

    def update(self):
        self.x += self.velocity_x
        self.y += self.velocity_y

Finally, inside the `draw_all` function, add a call to
the `update` method of each face before the
individual `draw` method. Your `draw_all` function should
now look like this:

    def draw_all(surface, faces):
        surface.fill('white')
        for face in faces:
            face.update()
            face.draw(surface)
        pygame.display.update()

Try it out. Add a few faces. If they fly across the screen
a bit too quickly to see, we will need to add a delay to 
our loop. Add the following line to the end of your `while` loop:

    pygame.time.delay(10)
    
This instruction creates a delay of 10 milliseconds per loop 
iteration, yielding about 100 frame updates per second. 
Experiment with a few different values for the delay, and
select the value that yields what is in your opinion the 
best-looking animation.

### Step 3.2: Bouncing (2 points)

Currently, the faces disappear after a
while, because they moves off the bottom of the screen.  We would like
to keep them bouncing inside the window. Add in checks to
the `update` method to reverse the appropriate velocity
component when a face hits a wall, by multiplying the velocity in
that dimension by -1.

The `get_width()` and `get_height()` methods of the `pygame.Surface` 
class give the width and height of the window. Think carefully about
how this information will be conveyed to your `Face` object so that
it can implement bouncing correctly.

### Step 3.3: Random speeds (2 points)

Abstract the velocities so they are initialized by parameters in
the `__init__` method, and
choose random velocities between -5 and 5 for both the x and y
dimension for each `Face` created. As you do not want the `Face` 
to have a velocity of zero, it is recommended that you generate
a random number between 1 and 5, and then (using another random
number) give a 50/50 chance of switching the number to be 
negative.

You should now have faces moving in all directions and bouncing 
off of all the walls of the window.

## Step 4: Extensions (6 points)

Augment your animation with two of the following extensions. 
Each completed extension is worth 3 points.
Feel free to make use of [Pygame's documentation](https://www.pygame.org/docs/)
as needed.


### Extension 4.1: Face sizes

Add a size component to
your `Face`, so the `setup` method can also initialize
the size. Change your `draw` method of `Face` to account
for this new size component, and test it out by drawing smaller and
larger faces.  Make sure your locations are still chosen so that the
face is always completely visible on the screen!

### Extension 4.2: Mouse input

Make your animations interactive by reacting to input from the
mouse. For example, you could randomly change the color of a `Face` 
when you click it with the mouse, 
drag and drop `Face`s from one place to another, and so forth.

### Extension 4.3: Keyboard input

Make your animations interactive by reacting to input from the
keyboard. For example, you could increase or decrease the velocity 
of all the `Face`s when certain keys are pressed, randomly change
their colors, and so forth.

### Extension 4.4: Animated faces

Alter your `update` method of the Face to change the internal pieces of the face
in a cyclic pattern. For example, the face could smile for a few timesteps, then frown,
and then go back to smiling. Or the eyeballs could be moving up and down, left and right.

### Extension 4.5 Face collisions

Right now all the `Face`s pass through each other when they move.
Add a collision detection method that checks each pair of faces to see if they
are intersecting, and if so, makes them bounce off of each other.


## What to Hand In

Submit `face1.py` and `face2.py` via Moodle.

Commit message:

Updated pygame with new install instructions.

labs/pygame.md, after:

---
layout: work
type: Lab
num: 11
worktitle: Graphics and Animation
---

## Materials

* [Pygame](https://www.pygame.org/)

## Overview

For today's lab,
[download the latest version of Pygame](https://www.pygame.org/wiki/GettingStarted)
for your operating system. To download and install it on your 
computer:
* Create a new PyCharm project.
* Create a new Python file (e.g. `main.py`) within that project.
* Type `import pygame` at the top of the file. The word `pygame`
  will be underlined in red. (If it is not underlined in red, it is
  because `pygame` is already installed.)
* Place your cursor atop the word `pygame`. Type Alt-Enter to bring up 
  autocorrections. It should bring up an option to install pygame.
  The image below shows what this should look like.
  
<img src="https://hendrix-cs.github.io{{site.baseurl}}/assets/images/pygame_install.png" width=500>

## Step 1: Faces (5 points)

### Step 1.1: The Game Loop

Every `pygame` program has at its heart a `while` loop that updates the screen and checks to see what
actions the user has taken. Prior to that loop, we write code to set up `pygame` and open a window in
which our scene will be rendered. The code below will start pygame, set up an empty window, and end the 
program when the user closes the window.

Create a file called `face1.py` and enter the code below:


    import pygame
    from pygame.locals import *


    def main():
        pygame.init()
        surface = pygame.display.set_mode((640, 400))
        running = True
        while running:
            pygame.display.update()
            for event in pygame.event.get():
                if event.type == QUIT:
                    running = False
        pygame.quit()

    if __name__ == '__main__':
        main()
        

### Step 1.2: Drawing shapes

The program below is a modification of the game loop from Step 1.1. Replace the code from Step 1.1
in `face1.py` with the code below:

    import pygame
    from pygame.locals import *


    def draw_all(surface):
        surface.fill(pygame.Color(255, 255, 255))
        pygame.draw.circle(surface, pygame.Color(255, 0, 0), (10, 10), 10)
        pygame.draw.rect(surface, pygame.Color(0, 255, 0), (10, 10, 20, 20))
        pygame.draw.line(surface, pygame.Color(0, 0, 0), (10, 10), (20, 20))
        pygame.draw.circle(surface, pygame.Color(0, 0, 0), (30, 30), 10, width=1)
        pygame.draw.rect(surface, pygame.Color(0, 0, 0), (40, 40, 20, 20), width=1)
        pygame.display.update()


    def main():
        pygame.init()
        surface = pygame.display.set_mode((640, 480))
        running = True
        while running:
            draw_all(surface)
            for event in pygame.event.get():
                if event.type == QUIT:
                    running = False
        pygame.quit()


    if __name__ == '__main__':
        main()

In this program, we have instructed `pygame` to draw several different shapes on the screen.
When we draw on the screen, we first need to
be familiar with the coordinate system. We denote the width as x and
the height as y.  Most computer graphics modules, including `pygame`,
specify that the x, y origin (0,0) is located in the upper-left corner
of the screen, with x increasing to the right and y increasing
downwards.

The first instruction (`surface.fill`) sets the background color of the window. Each `pygame.Color`
object is defined by three parameters, ranging in value from 0 to 255: its red, green, and blue levels.

You can also refer to colors by name, using a string. Feel free to consult this 
[list of available colors]({{site.baseurl}}/labs/pygame_colors.html) when drawing 
your `pygame` objects. Using a color string, the fill instruction would look like this:

    surface.fill('white')

The next two instructions (drawing a circle and a rectangle) give us filled-in shapes. Each instruction 
specifies the surface on which it is to be drawn and its color. To draw a circle, we also specify its 
center and its radius. To draw a rectangle, we specify the (x, y) coordinates of its upper-left corner, 
followed by its width and height.

The next three instructions (drawing a line, a circle, and a rectangle) give us lines and outlines. To
draw a line, we specify its surface, its color, the (x, y) coordinates where the line starts, and the 
(x, y) coordinates where the line ends. Drawing outlines of circles and rectangles requires giving it
a `width` parameter, denoting the thickness of the outline.

Also, notice that the first thing to be drawn is covered by the images
that follow. This indicates that the way that images are drawn,
their [Z-order](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Z-order), is based on time.

### Step 1.3: Drawing Faces

Modify the `draw_all` function from the previous step to draw a face 
on the screen. At a minimum, the face should have eyes, ears, a mouth 
and a nose. You can find more shapes on the 
[Pygame Documentation](https://www.pygame.org/docs/ref/draw.html) page.

Here is a version of `draw_all` that represents the very start of a face. 
This is intended as inspiration to get you started; please feel free to 
ignore, modify, or replace any and all aspects of this example.

    def draw_all(surface):
        surface.fill('white')
        pygame.draw.circle(surface, 'red', (320, 240), 50)
        pygame.draw.circle(surface, 'yellow', (295, 215), 18)
        pygame.draw.circle(surface, 'yellow', (345, 215), 18)
        pygame.draw.line(surface, 'orange', (300, 270), (340, 270))
        pygame.display.update()

## Step 2: Classes (5 points total)

### Step 2.1: Using the Mouse

Create a file called `points.py` and enter the code below:

    import pygame
    from pygame.locals import *


    def draw_all(surface, shapes):
        surface.fill('black')
        for shape in shapes:
            pygame.draw.circle(surface, 'white', shape, 5)
        pygame.display.update()


    def main():
        pygame.init()
        surface = pygame.display.set_mode((640, 480))
        shapes = []
        running = True
        while running:
            draw_all(surface, shapes)
            for event in pygame.event.get():
                if event.type == QUIT:
                    running = False
                elif event.type == MOUSEBUTTONDOWN:
                    shapes.append((event.pos[0], event.pos[1]))
        pygame.quit()


    if __name__ == '__main__':
        main()

        
Run the program. Click the mouse at various locations on the window.

The following elements are distinctive in this program:
* It checks for the `MOUSEBUTTONDOWN` event type.
* When it sees that event, it adds an `(x,y)` coordinate to the `points` list.
* It draws a white circle at each `(x,y)` coordinate indicated by a mouse click.


### Step 2.2: A Population of Faces (4 points)

We will represent a `Face` with a class in Python. The `Face` will need to remember
the `(x,y)` coordinates for the center of the face. The `draw` method of the `Face` class 
abstracts the original face from Step 1.3 so it can be centered around any `(x,y)` coordinates. 
This will let us move the face around the screen. To make this work, the circle representing the 
head will be located at `self.x`, `self.y`, and the other components will be represented as 
offsets from there. Of course, you should use your own face-drawing code in place of the 
example code shown below.

    class Face:
        def __init__(self, x, y):
            self.x = x
            self.y = y

        def draw(self, surface):
            pygame.draw.circle(surface, 'red', (self.x, self.y), 100)
            pygame.draw.circle(surface, 'yellow', (self.x - 25, self.y - 25), 35)
            pygame.draw.circle(surface, 'yellow', (self.x + 25, self.y - 25), 35)
            pygame.draw.line(surface, 'orange', (self.x - 20, self.y + 30), (self.x + 20, self.y + 30))
    
Create a new Python file called `face2.py` and enter your version of the Face class. 

Copy the code from Step 2.1 into `face2.py`. That code appends an `(x,y)` coordinate to the 
`shapes` list. Instead of appending that coordinate, append a `Face` object instead.
Where that code appends a point to the `shapes` Also alter `draw_all` to ask each `shape` 
to draw itself instead of drawing a circle around an `(x,y)` coordinate. Test it out, and 
make sure it places a `Face` wherever you click.

### Step 2.3: Random Colors (1 point)

Modify your `Face` class so that it has a `self.color` attribute. It should be initialized by
a `color` parameter that you add to the `Face` class's constructor (`__init__`). 
In the `draw` method of your `Face` class, replace references to the base color used for 
the face with `self.color`. (In the example of Step 1.3, the base color to be replaced was red.) 

Once these changes to the `Face` class are complete, modify `main` so
that each `Face` placed is given a random color. To assign a random
`Color`, create a list of colors you would like to employ. Then use `random.choice()` to 
select a color from that list every time a new `Face` object is created.


## Step 3: Movement (4 points total)

### Step 3.1: Animation

With the faces being drawn by an object, we
can now make these objects move. Add new attributes to
your `Face`, called `velocity_x` and `velocity_y`, to capture
the velocity of the `Face`. For now, initialize them to 1, so they will
be moving at a speed of 1 pixel per update, as shown here:

        self.velocity_x = 1
        self.velocity_y = 1

Next, add a new method to your `Face` class
called `update`. When called, this function will change the
values of `self.x` and `self.y` by the velocity, and
thus simulate movement.

    def update(self):
        self.x += self.velocity_x
        self.y += self.velocity_y

Finally, inside the `draw_all` function, add a call to
the `update` method of each face before the
individual `draw` method. Your `draw_all` function should
now look like this:

    def draw_all(surface, faces):
        surface.fill('white')
        for face in faces:
            face.update()
            face.draw(surface)
        pygame.display.update()

Try it out. Add a few faces. If they fly across the screen
a bit too quickly to see, we will need to add a delay to 
our loop. Add the following line to the end of your `while` loop:

    pygame.time.delay(10)
    
This instruction creates a delay of 10 milliseconds per loop 
iteration, yielding about 100 frame updates per second. 
Experiment with a few different values for the delay, and
select the value that yields what is in your opinion the 
best-looking animation.

### Step 3.2: Bouncing (2 points)

Currently, the faces disappear after a
while, because they moves off the bottom of the screen.  We would like
to keep them bouncing inside the window. Add in checks to
the `update` method to reverse the appropriate velocity
component when a face hits a wall, by multiplying the velocity in
that dimension by -1.

The `get_width()` and `get_height()` methods of the `pygame.Surface` 
class give the width and height of the window. Think carefully about
how this information will be conveyed to your `Face` object so that
it can implement bouncing correctly.

### Step 3.3: Random speeds (2 points)

Abstract the velocities so they are initialized by parameters in
the `__init__` method, and
choose random velocities between -5 and 5 for both the x and y
dimension for each `Face` created. As you do not want the `Face` 
to have a velocity of zero, it is recommended that you generate
a random number between 1 and 5, and then (using another random
number) give a 50/50 chance of switching the number to be 
negative.

You should now have faces moving in all directions and bouncing 
off of all the walls of the window.

## Step 4: Extensions (6 points)

Augment your animation with two of the following extensions. 
Each completed extension is worth 3 points.
Feel free to make use of [Pygame's documentation](https://www.pygame.org/docs/)
as needed.


### Extension 4.1: Face sizes

Add a size component to
your `Face`, so the `setup` method can also initialize
the size. Change your `draw` method of `Face` to account
for this new size component, and test it out by drawing smaller and
larger faces.  Make sure your locations are still chosen so that the
face is always completely visible on the screen!

### Extension 4.2: Mouse input

Make your animations interactive by reacting to input from the
mouse. For example, you could randomly change the color of a `Face` 
when you click it with the mouse, 
drag and drop `Face`s from one place to another, and so forth.

### Extension 4.3: Keyboard input

Make your animations interactive by reacting to input from the
keyboard. For example, you could increase or decrease the velocity 
of all the `Face`s when certain keys are pressed, randomly change
their colors, and so forth.

### Extension 4.4: Animated faces

Alter your `update` method of the Face to change the internal pieces of the face
in a cyclic pattern. For example, the face could smile for a few timesteps, then frown,
and then go back to smiling. Or the eyeballs could be moving up and down, left and right.

### Extension 4.5 Face collisions

Right now all the `Face`s pass through each other when they move.
Add a collision detection method that checks each pair of faces to see if they
are intersecting, and if so, makes them bounce off of each other.


## What to Hand In

Submit `face1.py` and `face2.py` via Moodle.
