web/exams.md, before:

---
title: Exams
---

There will be three in-class exams, the first worth 5% and the last
two each worth 10% of your final grade. They will consist of short
answer questions along with writing and debugging code.

- Exam 1: Friday, February 8, covering input/output, math, numerical
  data, conditionals, and binary encoding  
  ([Practice exam](static/exam1-practice-s19.pdf))

- Exam 2: Wednesday, March 6, covering functions, while loops,
  lists, and strings  
  ([Practice exam](static/exam2-practice-s19.pdf)

  <!-- , [Exam practice review code](static/Exam2.py), [Exam Bonus Assignment](static/exam-bonus.pdf) (due Monday 10/22 in class)) -->
  <!-- [In-class code from practice exam](static/exam2-practice.py)) -->

<!-- ; [Practice exam solution code](static/exam2-practice.py); [Bonus functions](http://mgoadric.github.io/csci150/homework/bonusfunctions.html) due Wednesday after spring break (March 29)) -\-> -->

- Exam 3: Monday, April 22, covering for loops, dictionaries,
    classes and objects, and recursion  

    <!-- ([Practice problems](static/exam3-practice-f18.pdf), -->
    <!-- [solutions](static/exam3-practice-f18-solutions.pdf), [Exam Bonus -->
    <!-- Assignment](static/exam-bonus.pdf) (due Monday December 3)) -->

    <!-- [tracing template](static/heap-tracing-template.pdf), [Practice -->
    <!-- problem solutions](static/exam3-practice-s18-solutions.pdf)) -->

There is no final exam; you will complete a final project instead, as
described above under Projects.

Commit message:

exam bonus, in-class code

web/exams.md, after:

---
title: Exams
---

There will be three in-class exams, the first worth 5% and the last
two each worth 10% of your final grade. They will consist of short
answer questions along with writing and debugging code.

- Exam 1: Friday, February 8, covering input/output, math, numerical
  data, conditionals, and binary encoding  
  ([Practice exam](static/exam1-practice-s19.pdf))

- Exam 2: Wednesday, March 6, covering functions, while loops,
  lists, and strings  
  ([Practice exam](static/exam2-practice-s19.pdf)

    [Exam Bonus Assignment](static/exam-bonus.pdf) (due in class
    the Friday after spring break, March 29)

  <!-- , [Exam practice review code](static/Exam2.py) -->
  <!-- [In-class code from practice exam](static/exam2-practice.py)) -->

<!-- ; [Practice exam solution code](static/exam2-practice.py); [Bonus functions](http://mgoadric.github.io/csci150/homework/bonusfunctions.html) due Wednesday after spring break (March 29)) -\-> -->

- Exam 3: Monday, April 22, covering for loops, dictionaries,
    classes and objects, and recursion  

    <!-- ([Practice problems](static/exam3-practice-f18.pdf), -->
    <!-- [solutions](static/exam3-practice-f18-solutions.pdf), [Exam Bonus -->
    <!-- Assignment](static/exam-bonus.pdf) (due Monday December 3)) -->

    <!-- [tracing template](static/heap-tracing-template.pdf), [Practice -->
    <!-- problem solutions](static/exam3-practice-s18-solutions.pdf)) -->

There is no final exam; you will complete a final project instead, as
described above under Projects.
